.TH XIL\-PRODUCE "1" "2026\-04\-19" "xil\-pipeline 0.1.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
xil\-produce
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xil\-produce
[-h] (--episode EPISODE | --tag TAG) [--show SHOW] [--script SCRIPT] [--dry-run] [--start-from START_FROM] [--stop-at STOP_AT] [--terse] [--gen-sfx] [--gen-music] [--gen-ambience] [--sfx-music] [--local-only] [--backend BACKEND] [--chatterbox-python PATH] [--voice-refs DIR] [--exaggeration FLOAT]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Voice Generation — generate voice stems via ElevenLabs

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-episode\fR \fI\,EPISODE\/\fR
Episode tag (e.g. S01E01) — derives cast and SFX config paths

.TP
\fB\-\-tag\fR \fI\,TAG\/\fR
Raw tag for non\-episodic content (e.g. V01C03, D01)

.TP
\fB\-\-show\fR \fI\,SHOW\/\fR
Show name override (default: from project.json)

.TP
\fB\-\-script\fR \fI\,SCRIPT\/\fR
Path to parsed script JSON (default: derived from cast config)

.TP
\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR
Preview all lines and TTS cost without API calls

.TP
\fB\-\-start\-from\fR \fI\,START_FROM\/\fR
Start generation from sequence number N (for resuming)

.TP
\fB\-\-stop\-at\fR \fI\,STOP_AT\/\fR
Stop generation at sequence number N, inclusive (for previewing a section)

.TP
\fB\-\-terse\fR
Truncate each line to 3 words to minimize TTS character cost

.TP
\fB\-\-gen\-sfx\fR
Generate SFX and BEAT stems

.TP
\fB\-\-gen\-music\fR
Generate music stems

.TP
\fB\-\-gen\-ambience\fR
Generate ambience stems

.TP
\fB\-\-sfx\-music\fR
(deprecated) shorthand for \-\-gen\-sfx \-\-gen\-music \-\-gen\-ambience

.TP
\fB\-\-local\-only\fR
Only place stems for effects already present in SFX/; skip API generation

.TP
\fB\-\-backend\fR \fI\,BACKEND\/\fR
TTS backend for dialogue voice stems. 'elevenlabs' (default) calls the
ElevenLabs API. 'gtts' generates a flat\-voice draft via Google Translate TTS
at no cost — all characters sound the same, useful for checking episode
duration before spending API credits. 'chatterbox' uses local Chatterbox TTS
with per\-character voice cloning from voice_refs/<key>.wav reference clips —
near\-production quality, free, GPU\-accelerated. Requires: pip install xil\-
pipeline[tts\-alt] (gtts) or a configured venv\-chatterbox (chatterbox).

.TP
\fB\-\-chatterbox\-python\fR \fI\,PATH\/\fR
Path to the Python executable in the chatterbox venv (default: auto\-detect
./venv\-chatterbox/bin/python3). Used only with \-\-backend chatterbox.

.TP
\fB\-\-voice\-refs\fR \fI\,DIR\/\fR
Directory of <speaker_key>.wav reference clips for Chatterbox zero\-shot voice
cloning (default: voice_refs/). Missing refs fall back to Chatterbox's default
voice.

.TP
\fB\-\-exaggeration\fR \fI\,FLOAT\/\fR
Chatterbox emotion exaggeration level: 0.0 = flat/monotone, 1.0 = dramatically
expressive (default: 0.5). Used only with \-\-backend chatterbox.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xil (1),
.BR xil-scan (1),
.BR xil-parse (1),
.BR xil-cues (1),
.BR xil-produce (1),
.BR xil-assemble (1),
.BR xil-daw (1),
.BR xil-migrate (1),
.BR xil-cleanup (1),
.BR xil-import (1),
.BR xil-regen (1),
.BR xil-master (1),
.BR xil-voices (1),
.BR xil-csv-join (1),
.BR xil-sfx (1),
.BR xil-sample (1),
.BR xil-sfx-lib (1),
.BR xil-splice (1),
.BR xil-mp3-hash (1),
.BR xil-migrate-workspace (1),
.BR xil-init (1)
.SH AUTHOR
John Brissette <xilcmd@gmail.com>
