.TH XIL\-SAMPLE "1" "2026\-04\-19" "xil\-pipeline 0.1.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
xil\-sample
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xil\-sample
[-h] (--episode TAG | --cast PATH) [--show SHOW] [--backend {elevenlabs,gtts,chatterbox}] [--chatterbox-python PATH] [--voice-refs DIR] [--exaggeration FLOAT] [--sample-text TEXT] [--dry-run] [--force]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Generate a voice sample MP3 for each cast member via the chosen TTS backend.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-episode\fR \fI\,TAG\/\fR
Episode tag (e.g. S02E03); derives cast config path

.TP
\fB\-\-cast\fR \fI\,PATH\/\fR
Explicit path to cast JSON file

.TP
\fB\-\-show\fR \fI\,SHOW\/\fR
Show name override (default: from project.json)

.TP
\fB\-\-backend\fR \fI\,{elevenlabs,gtts,chatterbox}\/\fR
TTS backend for sample generation. 'elevenlabs' (default) calls the ElevenLabs
API and uses the voice_id from the cast config. 'gtts' generates a flat\-voice
draft via Google Translate TTS at no cost (ignores voice_id). 'chatterbox'
uses local GPU TTS with zero\-shot voice cloning from voice_refs/<key>.wav
clips. Output lands in voice_samples/<TAG>/<backend>/ for side\-by\-side
comparison.

.TP
\fB\-\-chatterbox\-python\fR \fI\,PATH\/\fR
Path to the chatterbox venv Python (default: auto\-detect ./venv\-
chatterbox/bin/python3). Used only with \-\-backend chatterbox.

.TP
\fB\-\-voice\-refs\fR \fI\,DIR\/\fR
Directory containing <speaker_key>.wav reference clips for Chatterbox zero\-
shot voice cloning (default: voice_refs/). Used only with \-\-backend
chatterbox.

.TP
\fB\-\-exaggeration\fR \fI\,FLOAT\/\fR
Chatterbox emotion exaggeration level: 0.0 = flat, 1.0 = dramatic (default:
0.5). Used only with \-\-backend chatterbox.

.TP
\fB\-\-sample\-text\fR \fI\,TEXT\/\fR
Override the sample text spoken by each voice. Use {name} as a placeholder for
the speaker's full name. Default: "I am {name} not yo momma"

.TP
\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR
Print what would be generated without calling any TTS API

.TP
\fB\-\-force\fR
Regenerate samples even if files already exist on disk

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xil (1),
.BR xil-scan (1),
.BR xil-parse (1),
.BR xil-cues (1),
.BR xil-produce (1),
.BR xil-assemble (1),
.BR xil-daw (1),
.BR xil-migrate (1),
.BR xil-cleanup (1),
.BR xil-import (1),
.BR xil-regen (1),
.BR xil-master (1),
.BR xil-voices (1),
.BR xil-csv-join (1),
.BR xil-sfx (1),
.BR xil-sample (1),
.BR xil-sfx-lib (1),
.BR xil-splice (1),
.BR xil-mp3-hash (1),
.BR xil-migrate-workspace (1),
.BR xil-init (1)
.SH AUTHOR
John Brissette <xilcmd@gmail.com>
