.TH XIL "1" "April 2026" "xil\-pipeline 0.1.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
xil \- unified dispatcher for xil\-pipeline podcast production commands
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xil
\fI<command>\fR [\fIargs...\fR]
.br
.B xil
{\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR}
.br
.B xil
{\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR}
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBxil\fR is the unified entry point for the xil\-pipeline audio production
pipeline.  It dispatches to one of the subcommands listed below, passing all
remaining arguments through to the subcommand unchanged.
.PP
All subcommands are also available as standalone \fBxil\-*\fR commands
(e.g. \fBxil\-parse\fR, \fBxil\-produce\fR), which are installed alongside
\fBxil\fR.  The two interfaces are equivalent; use whichever you prefer.
.SH PIPELINE STAGES
Run these in order for a typical episode:
.TP
.B init
Workspace scaffolding \(em create project.json, speakers.json, sample script,
and empty subdirectories.  See
.BR xil\-init (1).
.TP
.B scan
Pre\-flight script scanner \(em check a production script for unknown speakers
and sections before parsing.  See
.BR xil\-scan (1).
.TP
.B parse
Script parser \(em convert a markdown production script into structured JSON.
See
.BR xil\-parse (1).
.TP
.B cues
Cues sheet ingestion \(em parse a sound cues markdown file into an asset
manifest, audit the SFX library, and optionally generate assets.  See
.BR xil\-cues (1).
.TP
.B produce
Voice stem generation \(em call the ElevenLabs TTS API to generate one MP3
stem per dialogue line.  See
.BR xil\-produce (1).
.TP
.B assemble
Master audio assembly \(em two\-pass multi\-track mix of voice and SFX stems
into a master MP3.  See
.BR xil\-assemble (1).
.TP
.B daw
DAW layer export \(em export four isolated WAV layers for Audacity mixing.
See
.BR xil\-daw (1).
.TP
.B migrate
Stem migration \(em diff old and new parsed JSON, copy unchanged stems,
report what needs regeneration.  See
.BR xil\-migrate (1).
.TP
.B cleanup
Stale stem cleanup \(em remove stems whose sequence number no longer matches
the current parsed JSON.  See
.BR xil\-cleanup (1).
.TP
.B import
Studio export import \(em extract dialogue stems from an ElevenLabs Studio
export ZIP and rename them to pipeline convention.  See
.BR xil\-import (1).
.TP
.B regen
Script regeneration \(em reconstruct a production script markdown from a
parsed JSON.  See
.BR xil\-regen (1).
.TP
.B master
Final master MP3 export \(em overlay the four DAW layer WAVs into a single
podcast\-ready MP3.  See
.BR xil\-master (1).
.SH UTILITIES
Run these as needed at any stage:
.TP
.B voices
Voice discovery \(em list ElevenLabs voices with enriched metadata; optionally
back\-fill cast JSON.  Best run before parse/produce.  See
.BR xil\-voices (1).
.TP
.B csv\-join
CSV + SFX/cast annotation join \(em annotate a parsed episode CSV with SFX
prompts and cast metadata.  Best run after parse.  See
.BR xil\-csv\-join (1).
.TP
.B sfx
Standalone SFX generation \(em generate sound\-effect stems independently of
voice generation.  Best run after cues/parse.  See
.BR xil\-sfx (1).
.TP
.B sample
Voice sample generation \(em generate a short TTS sample for each cast member
to audition voice assignments.  Best run after voices/cast config.  See
.BR xil\-sample (1).
.TP
.B sfx\-lib
SFX library discovery \(em list and search the local shared SFX asset library.
See
.BR xil\-sfx\-lib (1).
.TP
.B splice
Parsed JSON splice utility \(em insert or delete entries with automatic seq
renumbering.  Advanced use.  See
.BR xil\-splice (1).
.TP
.B mp3\-hash
Recursive MP3 SHA\-256 hash log \(em hash MP3 files for integrity auditing.
See
.BR xil\-mp3\-hash (1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help listing all subcommands and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the installed version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Scaffold a new workspace, then run the pipeline:
.PP
.RS
.nf
xil init my\-show \-\-show "Night Owls"
cd my\-show
xil scan scripts/sample_S01E01.md
xil parse scripts/sample_S01E01.md \-\-episode S01E01
xil produce \-\-episode S01E01 \-\-dry\-run
xil produce \-\-episode S01E01
xil assemble \-\-episode S01E01
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I project.json
Show name declaration in the current working directory.  Overridable with
\fB\-\-show\fR on most subcommands.
.TP
.I speakers.json
Speaker definitions.  Auto\-detected in the current directory; override with
\fB\-\-speakers\fR on \fBxil\-scan\fR and \fBxil\-parse\fR.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ELEVENLABS_API_KEY
API key for ElevenLabs TTS and sound\-effect generation.  Required by
\fBxil\-produce\fR, \fBxil\-sfx\fR, \fBxil\-cues\fR, \fBxil\-sample\fR, and
\fBxil\-voices\fR when not using \fB\-\-dry\-run\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xil\-init (1),
.BR xil\-scan (1),
.BR xil\-parse (1),
.BR xil\-cues (1),
.BR xil\-produce (1),
.BR xil\-assemble (1),
.BR xil\-daw (1),
.BR xil\-migrate (1),
.BR xil\-cleanup (1),
.BR xil\-import (1),
.BR xil\-regen (1),
.BR xil\-master (1),
.BR xil\-voices (1),
.BR xil\-csv\-join (1),
.BR xil\-sfx (1),
.BR xil\-sample (1),
.BR xil\-sfx\-lib (1),
.BR xil\-splice (1),
.BR xil\-mp3\-hash (1)
.SH AUTHOR
John Brissette <xilcmd@gmail.com>
